another aspect of the pivot involves moving away from the middle east .
but no amount of fancy footwork , whether pivoting or pirouetting , can diminish that region ’s importance .
the middle east will remain a central pillar of world energy for decades to come . whether it ultimately can export more energy than instability is the key question .
unlike east asia , the middle east remains a region in turmoil , the complexity of which defies analytical consensus .
do the region ’s crises stem from the lack of peace with israel ?
this deterrence logic produces a snowball effect .
with russia and the us holding 18,000 of the world ’s current stockpile of 19,000 nuclear weapons , it is proving impossible to persuade any of the other nuclear-armed states to reduce their own ( much smaller ) arsenals until the big two make further drastic cuts to theirs .
china shares russia ’s concerns about us conventional and missile-defense superiority , and is increasing and modernizing its estimated 240-weapon stockpile .
with china taking that course , india – outside the npt but with 100 weapons of its own – feels the need to add to its own arsenal .
and pakistan then becomes even more determined to try to keep ahead of india .
two centuries later that was no longer the case : by the end of the nineteenth century , median living standards in britain and other countries to which the industrial revolution had spread were , for the first time in recorded history , light-years above any neo-malthusian benchmark of subsistence .
the early industrial-era economic accomplishments occurred despite the loss of a substantial proportion of national income to support a corrupt , decadent , and profligate aristocracy .
they occurred despite a tripling of the population , which put extraordinary malthusian pressure on the economy underlying natural resource base , and despite the mobilization of an unprecedented proportion of national income for nearly a century of intensive war against france , a power with three times britain ’s population .
how , exactly , did these accomplishments occur ?
what were the small differences that turned out to matter so much ?
the referendum ’s outcome has had little effect on the wider global landscape , and the impact on eu institutions is just another crisis to be managed , not the existential implosion that london-centric british newspapers imagine .
may is in no hurry to act ; nor is german chancellor angela merkel ( though , facing re-election next year , the increasingly desperate french president françois hollande says that he is ) .
may , who is as tight-lipped as cameron was an open ( if empty ) book , has already created the institutional skeleton of a political strategy .
her government has created a department of international trade , which will be responsible for drawing up trade arrangements with the eu and the rest of the world ( the european commission had previously handled such arrangements ) .
another new department , the so-called brexit ministry , will handle political , judicial , and constitutional negotiations .
venezuela has tried to finance itself with the help of the china development bank , which does not impose the kind of conditionality that imf bashers dislike .
instead , the cdb lends on secret terms , for uses that are undisclosed and corrupt , and with built-in privileges for chinese companies in areas like telecommunications ( huawei ) , appliances ( haier ) , cars ( chery ) , and oil drilling ( ictv ) .
the chinese have not required that venezuela do anything to increase the likelihood that it regains creditworthiness .
they merely demand more oil as collateral .
whatever the imf ’s faults , the cdb is a disgrace .